readme.md, before:



# 802.15.4 Sniffer for SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E

- [802.15.4 Sniffer for SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E](#802154-sniffer-for-sonoff-zigbee-30-usb-dongle-plus-e)
  - [What's needed](#whats-needed)
  - [Firmware Flashing](#firmware-flashing)
  - [Wireshark Extcap installation](#wireshark-extcap-installation)
  - [How to record packets](#how-to-record-packets)
  - [Wireshark color scheme for ZigBee](#wireshark-color-scheme-for-zigbee)
  - [How it works](#how-it-works)
  - [How to compile](#how-to-compile)
  - [What's next](#whats-next)


This reposiroty contains firmware to allow capturing 802.15.4 packets with a USB SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 DONGLE Plus-E.

The USB dongle once reflashed will capture 802.15.4 traffic (Zigbee, 6lowpan/Thread) and send a frame in JSON format on USB Serial COM port to the host computer.

Wireshark can be used to display captured packets.

## What's needed

A [SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E](https://sonoff.tech/product/gateway-and-sensors/sonoff-zigbee-3-0-usb-dongle-plus-e/) is required.

![SONOFF USB DONGLE Plus-E](/docs/Sonoff%20USB%20dongle%20Plus-E.PNG)

And a computer running Windows 10 or Windows 11 with Wireshark.

## Firmware Flashing

To capture 802.15.4 packets, the Sonoff USB dongle must be flashed with the sniffer firmware.
WARNING! Reflashing the device will change its firmware. The USB dongle will no longer provide factory coordinator firmware.

The SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E comes with a pre-installed bootloader and application running a Zigbee coordinator.
To replace the pre-installed application follow the procedure "Firmware Flashing" provided by SONOFF found at https://sonoff.tech/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/SONOFF-Zigbee-3.0-USB-dongle-plus-firmware-flashing.pdf.
The file Sniffer_802.15.4_SONOFF_USB_Dongle_Plus_E.gbl must be used when performing the XModem transfer (located in folder Output\Sniffer_802.15.4_SONOFF_USB_Dongle_Plus_E)

## Wireshark Extcap installation

Wireshark needs a converter to understand and display correctly the packets captured by the USB dongle.
A wireshark converter is called an Extcap (short for EXTernal CAPture).

To provide Wireshark with the needed Extcap, copy the file found in this repo under folder /Wireshrak/Extcap_802.15.4.exe to wireshark extcap folder.
To locate the wireshark extcap folder, start wireshark, click on Help->About wireshark, select TAB named "folders", locate the
Global Extcap path
or
Personal Extcap path

The file Extcap_802.15.4.exe needs to be copied in only one of the two folders.
Close wireshark once the copy is done, the Extcap will be loaded the next time wireshark is started.

If you are interested in wireshark Extcap, you can refer to wireshark doc [8.2. Adding Capture Interfaces And Log Sources Using Extcap](https://www.wireshark.org/docs/wsdg_html_chunked/ChCaptureExtcap.html).
The Wireshark Extcap plugin provided in this repo is compatible with computer running Windows 10 and up.


## How to record packets

Once a USB dongle is flashed with sniffer firmware and wireshark Extcap is copied in one of wireshark extcap folders, packet capture can begin.
Plug the USB dongle in one of the available USB port. Drivers should be automatically detected on Windows 10 or Windows 11.
Start wireshark.
A list of available COM port should be displayed in the bottom window
![wireshark start screen](/docs/wireshark_start_screen.PNG)

Click on the gear next to the COM port corresponding to USB DONGLE COM port being used.

A configuration window will appear to select the channel to use to capture packets.
Press start once the desired channel is selected
![wireshark channel selection](/docs/wireshark_channel_selection.PNG)

Capture should start!

## Wireshark color scheme for ZigBee

By default Wireshark presents ZigBee packets in black text on white background.
The default color schem can make it difficult to quickly identify packet when analyzing ZigBee packets.
This repo provides a color scheme for Wireshark (file Wireshark\zigbee_color_scheme) well suited for ZigBee packet analysis.
ZCL and APS packets are in green
ZDP/ZDO packets are colored red
Network layer packets are presented in blue

The color scheme can be imported in Wireshark by selecting View->Coloring Rules...
![wireshark coloring rules](/docs/coloring_rules.PNG)

Click on Import...
and select the file "zigbee_color_scheme"
![wireshark coloring rules file import](/docs/coloring_rules_file_select.PNG)

Resulting coloring rules
![wireshark coloring rules result](/docs/coloring_rules_result.PNG)

Capture example
![wireshark capture example](/docs/example_capture.PNG)


## How it works

The USB dongle records 802.15.4 packets, converts to a JSON format and transfers via COM port at 1Mbit/s.
The extcap processes incoming JSON payloads and converts to wireshark pcapng TAP (LINKTYPE_IEEE802_15_4_TAP, 283, DLT_IEEE802_15_4_TAP).

The JSON format is:

  L = length
  Q = LQI
  R = RSSI
  C = channel
  S = string of hexadecimal representation of 802.15.4 packet

Example:

```json
{"L":50,"Q":255,"R":-94,"S":"4188a31e48ffff00000912fcff000001cc0885dafeffd76b0828f6ea32000885dafeffd76b0800295e19cad6ebd84ca2aee2"}
```

The USB dongle accepts channel selection via a JSON payload.

Example, C = channel:

```json
{"C":11}
```

when sent to the usb dongle will select channel 11, can be used at anytime.

## How to compile

The project builds using a docker image.
To build the project you will need docker installed and running on your computer.

Using vscode, simply open this project in vscode and use the devcontainer provided.
Compile by issuing:
```make rebuild -f ./Sources/Target/Sonoff_USB_Dongle_Plus_E/makefile```

Alternatively:
The file Dockerfile can be used to create an image that contains gcc-arm-none-eabi, SiLabs commander and Segger J-link software.
To locally build the image, you must first download SimplicityCommander-Linux.zip from https://www.silabs.com/documents/login/software/SimplicityCommander-Linux.zip and store it in the same folder as of the Dockerfile.

The docker image can be constructed by issuing:

```docker image build -t erksponge/gcc_arm_commander_jflash .```

and to compile the Sonoff sniffer:
```docker run --rm -v ".:/home/app" --name build_container erksponge/gcc_arm_commander_jflash:1.0.0 make rebuild -f ./Sources/Target/Sonoff_USB_Dongle_Plus_E/makefile -j8```


## What's next

This is a hobby project, so I do it for learning and fun.
Here are some wish list items that I have in mind:
- Convert extcap to Python so it will be portable to Linux and Mac.
- Port to other hardware from other vendor (ATSAMR21 and TI2652P)
- Improve BSP when porting evolves
- Provide a .gbl having the factory image for user desiring to return to the factory firmware
- keep having fun...

Commit message:

Add Python extcap script for use with Linux.

readme.md, after:



# 802.15.4 Sniffer for SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E

- [802.15.4 Sniffer for SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E](#802154-sniffer-for-sonoff-zigbee-30-usb-dongle-plus-e)
  - [What's needed](#whats-needed)
  - [Firmware Flashing](#firmware-flashing)
  - [Wireshark Extcap installation](#wireshark-extcap-installation)
  - [How to record packets](#how-to-record-packets)
  - [Wireshark color scheme for ZigBee](#wireshark-color-scheme-for-zigbee)
  - [How it works](#how-it-works)
  - [How to compile](#how-to-compile)
  - [What's next](#whats-next)


This repository contains firmware to allow capturing 802.15.4 packets with a USB SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 DONGLE Plus-E.

The USB dongle once reflashed will capture 802.15.4 traffic (Zigbee, 6lowpan/Thread) and send a frame in JSON format on USB Serial COM port to the host computer.

Wireshark can be used to display captured packets.

## What's needed

A [SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E](https://sonoff.tech/product/gateway-and-sensors/sonoff-zigbee-3-0-usb-dongle-plus-e/) is required.

![SONOFF USB DONGLE Plus-E](/docs/Sonoff%20USB%20dongle%20Plus-E.PNG)

And a computer running Windows 10 or Windows 11 with Wireshark.

## Firmware Flashing

To capture 802.15.4 packets, the Sonoff USB dongle must be flashed with the sniffer firmware.
WARNING! Reflashing the device will change its firmware. The USB dongle will no longer provide factory coordinator firmware.

The SONOFF Zigbee 3.0 USB DONGLE Plus-E comes with a pre-installed bootloader and application running a Zigbee coordinator.
To replace the pre-installed application follow the procedure "Firmware Flashing" provided by SONOFF found at https://sonoff.tech/wp-content/uploads/2023/02/SONOFF-Zigbee-3.0-USB-dongle-plus-firmware-flashing.pdf.
The file Sniffer_802.15.4_SONOFF_USB_Dongle_Plus_E.gbl must be used when performing the XModem transfer (located in folder Output\Sniffer_802.15.4_SONOFF_USB_Dongle_Plus_E)

## Wireshark Extcap installation

Wireshark needs a converter to understand and display correctly the packets captured by the USB dongle.
A wireshark converter is called an Extcap (short for EXTernal CAPture).

Extcap files can be found in this repo under folder /Wireshark/:

  - Windows: Extcap_802.15.4.exe; Compatible with Windows 10 and up.
  - Python/Linux: zigbee_dongle_json_sniffer; Requires Python 3.9+ interpreter and pyserial.

To provide Wireshark with the needed Extcap, copy the appropriate file to the wireshark extcap folder. To locate the wireshark extcap folder, start wireshark, click on Help->About wireshark, select TAB named "folders", locate the "Global Extcap path" or "Personal Extcap path".

The extcap file  needs to be copied in only one of the two folders.

Close wireshark once the copy is done, the Extcap will be loaded the next time wireshark is started.

If you are interested in wireshark Extcap, you can refer to wireshark doc [8.2. Adding Capture Interfaces And Log Sources Using Extcap](https://www.wireshark.org/docs/wsdg_html_chunked/ChCaptureExtcap.html).

## How to record packets

Once a USB dongle is flashed with sniffer firmware and wireshark Extcap is copied in one of wireshark extcap folders, packet capture can begin.
Plug the USB dongle in one of the available USB port. Drivers should be automatically detected on Windows 10 or Windows 11.
Start wireshark.
A list of available COM port should be displayed in the bottom window
![wireshark start screen](/docs/wireshark_start_screen.PNG)

Click on the gear next to the COM port corresponding to USB DONGLE COM port being used.

A configuration window will appear to select the channel to use to capture packets.
Press start once the desired channel is selected
![wireshark channel selection](/docs/wireshark_channel_selection.PNG)

Capture should start!

## Wireshark color scheme for ZigBee

By default Wireshark presents ZigBee packets in black text on white background.
The default color scheme can make it difficult to quickly identify packet when analyzing ZigBee packets.
This repo provides a color scheme for Wireshark (file Wireshark\zigbee_color_scheme) well suited for ZigBee packet analysis.
ZCL and APS packets are in green
ZDP/ZDO packets are colored red
Network layer packets are presented in blue

The color scheme can be imported in Wireshark by selecting View->Coloring Rules...
![wireshark coloring rules](/docs/coloring_rules.PNG)

Click on Import...
and select the file "zigbee_color_scheme"
![wireshark coloring rules file import](/docs/coloring_rules_file_select.PNG)

Resulting coloring rules
![wireshark coloring rules result](/docs/coloring_rules_result.PNG)

Capture example
![wireshark capture example](/docs/example_capture.PNG)


## How it works

The USB dongle records 802.15.4 packets, converts to a JSON format and transfers via COM port at 1Mbit/s.
The extcap processes incoming JSON payloads and converts to wireshark pcapng TAP (LINKTYPE_IEEE802_15_4_TAP, 283, DLT_IEEE802_15_4_TAP).

The JSON format is:

  L = length
  Q = LQI
  R = RSSI
  C = channel
  S = string of hexadecimal representation of 802.15.4 packet

Example:

```json
{"L":50,"Q":255,"R":-94,"S":"4188a31e48ffff00000912fcff000001cc0885dafeffd76b0828f6ea32000885dafeffd76b0800295e19cad6ebd84ca2aee2"}
```

The USB dongle accepts channel selection via a JSON payload.

Example, C = channel:

```json
{"C":11}
```

when sent to the USB dongle will select channel 11, can be used at anytime.

## How to compile

The project builds using a docker image.
To build the project you will need docker installed and running on your computer.

Using vscode, simply open this project in vscode and use the devcontainer provided.
Compile by issuing:
```make rebuild -f ./Sources/Target/Sonoff_USB_Dongle_Plus_E/makefile```

Alternatively:
The file Dockerfile can be used to create an image that contains gcc-arm-none-eabi, SiLabs commander and Segger J-link software.
To locally build the image, you must first download SimplicityCommander-Linux.zip from https://www.silabs.com/documents/login/software/SimplicityCommander-Linux.zip and store it in the same folder as of the Dockerfile.

The docker image can be constructed by issuing:

```docker image build -t erksponge/gcc_arm_commander_jflash .```

and to compile the Sonoff sniffer:
```docker run --rm -v ".:/home/app" --name build_container erksponge/gcc_arm_commander_jflash:1.0.0 make rebuild -f ./Sources/Target/Sonoff_USB_Dongle_Plus_E/makefile -j8```


## What's next

This is a hobby project, so I do it for learning and fun.
Here are some wish list items that I have in mind:
- Convert extcap to Python so it will be portable to Linux and Mac.
- Port to other hardware from other vendor (ATSAMR21 and TI2652P)
- Improve BSP when porting evolves
- Provide a .gbl having the factory image for user desiring to return to the factory firmware
- keep having fun...
